# edit-last

*Converted from: `./edit-last.pdf`*  
*Total pages: 7*  
*File size: 2470369 bytes*  
*Converted: Mon Sep  8 02:03:48 PM PDT 2025*

---

## Page 1

### Figures and Images (2 found)

#### Figure: img-000.png
![Figure from page 1](images/page_001_content/img-000.png)

#### Figure: img-001.png
![Figure from page 1](images/page_001_content/img-001.png)

---

### Complete Page View
![Page 1 Complete](images/page_001_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
              RSTU General Meeting 7/9/25
➔ Assign roles

     ● Facilitator: Brian

     ● Notetaker:

➔ Introductions (notetaker write down names)

     ● Brian, Stacey, Osprey, Nyx, Katie, Alex, Rosa

➔ Review of issues anyone is having with their own housing

     ● Nothing dire, Rosa has to pay for a carpet cleaning to get her lease
        renewed :(

➔ Workshop on how to be a support team with Katie from Soil Solidarity

     ● Click here for files!

     ● “#1 Cause of problems in mutual aid groups is communication”

           ● Non-violent communication gives us a shared language

           ● Book: Non-violent communication by Mark Rosenberg
```

---

## Page 2

### Complete Page View
![Page 2 Complete](images/page_002_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
    ● Support team training

          ● Mutual aid spaces are about co-creation

          ● “Take on a role and really hold it”

                  ○ Take ownership of tasks that you are good at

          ● “Be present, be real”

                  ○ Show up as your full self

          ● Accountability is the lifeblood, people need to trust you

                  ○ Needs to be a group commitment

                  ○ Group accountability, accountability buddies who check
                     in with each other to see if their tasks have gotten done

          ● Work with what you have and don’t take on too much

                  ○ Don’t take on a new project when you can’t actually
                     handle it!

          ● Solidarity not Charity zine, Accomplices not Allies

    ● Schedule posts on instagram so it’s less of a task

    ● Katie offers to help with getting things down on paper & facilitating
       meetings

➔ Committee updates

    ● Legislative

          ● Keep track of city council
```

---

## Page 3

### Complete Page View
![Page 3 Complete](images/page_003_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
          ○ DSA City Council watcher could potentially share with us

● Canvassing

     ● Tabling outside the Farmer’s Market

          ○ Distributed new zine + mini handout on AB121 becoming
            law Oct 1

                ⎻ Coming up with things to say to respond to
                  common prompts, Q&A

                ⎻ Getting some people coming up saying “Well I’m
                  a good landlord”

                ⎻ Postcards had a lot of attention, “Rate your
                  landlord” got most responses, “How has your
                  landlord screwed you over” had fewer but more in
                  depth, tenants association info got interest

                ⎻ People who work with Section 8 housing saying
                  they have concerns but people are afraid to
                  address them due to retaliation, don’t want to lose
                  the voucher

                ⎻ Tabling but having it as a discussion/ help desk
                  for tenants issues –getting us to a place where we
                  feel comfortable giving that kind of advice

                      ● Alex talked to Ilse about doing some kind of
                        training with us

                ⎻ People are excited about joining potential actions
                  at a specific housing complex

          ○ Who can join for July 20 (8:30 am - 11:30 am at Idlewild
            Park)?
```

---

## Page 4

### Figures and Images (3 found)

#### Figure: img-000.png
![Figure from page 4](images/page_004_content/img-000.png)

#### Figure: img-001.png
![Figure from page 4](images/page_004_content/img-001.png)

#### Figure: img-002.png
![Figure from page 4](images/page_004_content/img-002.png)

---

### Complete Page View
![Page 4 Complete](images/page_004_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                 ⎻ Stacey, Brian,




           ○ Vinyl banner for tabling
                ⎻ Reno Sunrise Movement suggested VistaPrint
                        ● Ben - I would suggest RenoType as a local,
                           unionized alternative.
                ⎻ 6’ x 2.5’ banner is $57.59 (single-sided full color,
                    with grommets, 15 oz. “outdoor use”) or $44.79
                    (13 oz. “indoor use”) + taxes/shipping — Do we
                    have funds for this or should we DIY a banner?
                ⎻ Ben will check with Laura from PLAN about paying
                    for it
                ⎻ Design suggestion:




● Recap of Educational Materials meeting

     ● Current priorities:
```

---

## Page 5

### Complete Page View
![Page 5 Complete](images/page_005_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                 ○ Tenants rights in Nevada

                 ○ What is a tenants union

                 ○ Common tactics of landlords

                 ○ Quotes zine (including quotes from Abolish Rent &
                   more)

                 ○ All drafts are available on the drive under Committees →
                   Educational Material

           ● Next meeting is online (Discord voice chat) this Friday 7/11
             from 5:00-6:00 pm — please join if you are interested in
             helping out with any educational material!

                 ○ Stacey won't be there if someone else can please
                   facilitate (or just turn it into a work session?)

     ● Mutual Aid

           ● Status on previous/current requests?

                 ○ Someone got help moving their mattress, Osprey says
                   very successful

                       ⎻ Follow up with Michael about attending a meeting

                 ○ Rosa can store bins in her garage

           ● Any new requests?

                 ○ Reno Sparks Mutual Aid Group had a request for
                   information from people at Kromer properties

➔ Any other business

     ● Next steps & planning from Gary (re: “by Vintage” complexes/FPI
        Management)

     ● Osprey & Nyx have been chatting with Sylvia about her housing
        struggles in northern NV

           ● She contacted a news channel in Utah
```

---

## Page 6

### Complete Page View
![Page 6 Complete](images/page_006_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
           ● She wants to help but hard to figure out remote tasks

           ● Ask her to write up a blog post for the website

     ● Bob Conrad emailed asking for someone to call him, check with Ben
        to see if he called?

     ● Do a screening of Bob Conrad’s documentary w/ a follow up
        presentation

           ● Brian will reach out to him

     ● Erika M invites us to tour Eddy House new building July 18th

           ● Rosa will get a time from Erika and share it

     ● Can we get a discord join link for Melony?

     ● Newsletter

           ● Beehiive–Stacey just set it up for Mutual Aid Mondays

           ● Free Action Network account

           ● Monthly meeting to schedule emails & social media posts

                  ○ Write newsletters, schedule IG posts, come up with one
                       additional social media post

                  ○ Sunday, July 27th 6 pm

➔ *****ASSIGN NEXT FACILITATOR*******

     ● Next meeting July 23

           ● Facilitator: Stacey
```

---

## Page 7

### Complete Page View
![Page 7 Complete](images/page_007_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
● Notetaker: Brian
```

---

