# edit

*Converted from: `./edit.pdf`*  
*Total pages: 3*  
*File size: 83163 bytes*  
*Converted: Mon Sep  8 02:09:01 PM PDT 2025*

---

## Page 1

### Figures and Images (2 found)

#### Figure: img-000.png
![Figure from page 1](images/page_001_content/img-000.png)

#### Figure: img-001.png
![Figure from page 1](images/page_001_content/img-001.png)

---

### Complete Page View
![Page 1 Complete](images/page_001_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
              RSTU General Meeting 6/25/25
Highlights = follow up in the future

➔ Assign roles

      ● Facilitator: Ben

      ● Notetaker: TBD

➔ Introductions (notetaker write down names)

      ●

➔ Review of issues anyone is having with their own housing

      ●

➔ Committee updates

      ● Legislative

             ● Bill Status -

                   ○ AB 121 - Fee Transparency

                           ⎻ SIGNED

                           ⎻ Terry Wessell for ch8 did a report on rental fees in
                             the area

                   ○ AB 201 - Eviction Record Sealing

                           ⎻ Vetoed
```

---

## Page 2

### Complete Page View
![Page 2 Complete](images/page_002_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                ○ AB 223 - Habitability Enforcement

                       ⎻ Vetoed

                ○ AB 283 - Summary Eviction Reform

                       ⎻ Vetoed

                ○ AB 475 - Eviction Diversion Programs & Rental
                  Assistance

                       ⎻ SIGNED

          ● Accountability & Next Steps

                ○ Las Vegas Press Conference

                ○ Las Vegas Town Hall

     ● Canvassing

          ● Tabling at the Farmer’s Market

                ○ Report Back

                       ⎻ We should end at 11:30 since the heat gets too
                         bad, less people willing to talk anyway

                ○ More material to hand out

                       ⎻ Was anything decided here?

                       ⎻ Ideas from meeting last Friday

                ○ Schedule:

     ● Mutual Aid

          ● Status on previous/current requests?

                ○ On the person who needed bins, they haven’t got back to
                  Osprey on that

                       ⎻ Osprey will reach out again

          ● We should make a handout for tabling. Talked about last Friday.

➔ Any other business

     ● Schedule meeting to make pamphlets/zines over discord
```

---

## Page 3

### Complete Page View
![Page 3 Complete](images/page_003_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
            ● This Friday, the 27th, at 5 PM on discord. If anyone wants to
               help research please contact Stacey or Nyx

      ● Gary & Vintage at the Crossing (FPI Management)

            ● Gary did not show up, will need to get updates on that situation
               from him

            ● Nyx heard from Gary, he is supposed to be here tonight

➔ *****ASSIGN NEXT FACILITATOR*******

      ● Next meeting 7/9

            ● Facilitator: TBD

➔ Invite to Discord:

      ●
```

---

