# 03-20-2024-rstu-agenda

*Converted from: `./03-20-2024-rstu-agenda.pdf`*  
*Total pages: 3*  
*File size: 40978 bytes*  
*Converted: Mon Sep  8 02:04:14 PM PDT 2025*

---

## Page 1

### Complete Page View
![Page 1 Complete](images/page_001_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                        03-20-2024 RSTU Agenda
1. Assign Roles
       a. Facilitator: Jack
       b. Note Taker(s): Elizabeth
       c. Go over agenda
2. Introductions
       a. Self Introductions (Notetaker write down names)
            i.    People in Attendance: 14 (3 new)
                     1. Jack
                     2. Christi
                     3. Nali
                     4. David
                     5. Michael
                     6. Alex
                     7. Sophia
                     8. Maddy
                     9. Mia
                     10. Caleb
                     11. Elizabeth
                     12. Rosa
                     13. Khaz!
                     14. Nathaniel
                     15. Bryce
                     16. Shou
                     17. Lala
3. Committee Updates:
        a. Legislative
              i.  Thoughts on a local rent control ballot initiative?
●   Jack gave legislative update, see legislative agenda notes from 3/11/2024
             ii.  Discuss state-level legislation priorities
            iii.  Make Signal chat
        b. Bylaws Committee will go later
●   Proposed bylaws draft was provided which included elected roles
●   Will add an extra bylaw about special elections
●   Positive feedback about three different roles right
●   Caleb suggested having volunteers switch around every two weeks
        ○ Concerns were raised that this would result in more work
        ○ General consensus we should have more continuity
●   David motioned to incorporate these elected positions and Rosa sections
        ○ Motion passes
```

---

## Page 2

### Complete Page View
![Page 2 Complete](images/page_002_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
● Will edit rules of election and propose at latter date
       c. Power Mapping
             i.   Rosa proposes to merge committee with legislative committee
● Rosa would like to merge committee because they require the same types of
   skills
● Power mapping committee has not been very active
       ○ Also only has three people
       ○ Could shift power mapping to legislative committee
       ○ However there are concerns they don't fit well and may fit better with
          canvassing committee
                ■ Having more strategizing would help canvassing committee
● City rent control would fit with more power mapping
● Members feel the power mapping committee is to broad
● Could be helpful to write goals of the committee
● Will talk to Sierra and will propose what to do in the next meeting
       d. Canvassing
             i.   Updates from Sunday
● Rosa and Alex went canvassing, knocked on 14 doors and talked to 4-5 people
   at Marina's Edge
● Good to follow up, feel we have reached enough people to get together at a
   meeting
            ii.   Updates from Alex regarding a new complex to canvass
● Redfield Ridge would be an ideal second complex - need more people
   canvassing
● Set up a future training to train people on how to canvass
● Rosa motions to form a Canvassing committee Elizabeth seconds
       ○ Motion passes
4. New Discussions:
       a. Katie presents on Soil Solidarity
       b. Review proposed bylaws regarding Elected Positions
       c. Report back from 3/6 Lombardo event
● Lombardo event was good, had a good turn out of people protesting. Had
   banners and flyers to discuss with people and asked people to let us know what
   the governor said.
● Governor did acknowledge us but generally said housing is a more complicated
   issue then it seems - specifically talked about the lands bill which has to do with
   the supply side and want to sell lands
● General positive response
       d. Discuss officially joining NHJA
```

---

## Page 3

### Complete Page View
![Page 3 Complete](images/page_003_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
   ● Pros - they have money and are more connected to other groups in Nevada,
     partnering with southern groups could be good
   ● Cons - may eventually ask us for something
   ● May feel better if we have written down what it means to join just so it's not so
     nebulous
   ● Ask Ben for more information
        e. Discuss making Canvassing into a committee
                i. Propose meeting to phonebank & strategize on Saturday
   ● Saturday at 11:00 at Alexs apartment and call everyone
   ● Before we start on a new complex do a training
               ii. Follow up with people who said they’d be interested in knocking on
                   doors
        f. Discuss creating Discord roles for committees
   ● Alex will make these
        g. River clean-up Sunday, March 24th 10 am.
        h. Pass out t-shirts!
Future Action Items
           i. Assign next week’s facilitator: David
Eviction rights training by PLAN April 4th (virtual) at 5:30 pm
       Could plan a social event around that
```

---

