# 04-03-2024-rstu-agenda

*Converted from: `./04-03-2024-rstu-agenda.pdf`*  
*Total pages: 3*  
*File size: 41165 bytes*  
*Converted: Mon Sep  8 02:08:20 PM PDT 2025*

---

## Page 1

### Complete Page View
![Page 1 Complete](images/page_001_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                    D 04-03-2024 RSTU Agenda
1. Assign Roles
     ○ Facilitator: David
     ○ Note Taker(s): Mia
     ○ Go over agenda
2. Introductions
     ○ Self Introductions (Notetaker write down names)
         i.    People in Attendance:
                  1. Elizabeth
                  2. Ben
                  3. David
                  4. Nahli
                  5. Maddie
                  6. Mike
                  7. Rosa
                  8. Katie
                  9. Blaine
                  10. Sophia
                  11. Lala
                  12. David (2)
3. Committee Updates:
     ○ Legislative
         i.   Johnson v. Grants Pass Supreme Court Case, do we want to do
              something?
                  1. Will determine whether it is constitutional to criminalize
                     sleeping outdoors when no other options are available
                  2. People in the community are concerned
                         a. Should we collaborate with other orgs?
                               i.  Family Soup
                              ii.  Faith in Action
                  3. Action items from website will be put in discord
                  4. Ben would like to hold a press conference
                         a. Time - after 5 pm
                         b. Location - tbd
     ○ Bylaws Committee
         i.   Will review new sections of the proposed bylaws
                  1. Voting
                  2. Changing/adding bylaws and core values
                  3. Accountability
                  4. Data security
```

---

## Page 2

### Complete Page View
![Page 2 Complete](images/page_002_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
          ii. David motioned to vote to accept
         iii. Unanimous yes
      ○ Power Mapping
           i. Give update on merge decision
                 1. Put on hold and reform when needed
      ○ Canvassing
           i. Marinas Edge event update
                 1. Meeting with Marina’s Edge on Saturday, April 6th
4. New Discussions:
     ○ Katie presents on Soil Solidarity - Presentation
          i.  What
                  1. Help people grow food in their yards and give extra back to
                     the community
                  2. Resource for education and equipment
         ii.  Why
                  1. Alternative to capitalism, tangible action
        iii.  Connection to housing
                  1. Food sovereignty
        iv.   How
                  1. Community, anarchist roots
         v.   Action items
                  1. Looking for more people to join team
                         a. Develop curriculum
                         b. Food processing team
                         c. Build a model
                  2. Groundswell
                         a. Thursdays April 18th, May 2nd
                               i.   3 pm - sunset
                         b. Meet the team, option to jump in and help
     ○ Ben will present on NHJA and answer questions
          i.  Guiding document in #general discord channel
         ii.  Goals
                  1. Eviction reform
                  2. Rent stabilization
                  3. Tenant protection
        iii.  Questions
                  1. What is expected of RSTU
                         a. Nothing more than what the union is already doing
                         b. The goal is to collaborate with multiple orgs
                  2. How does NHJA benefit
```

---

## Page 3

### Complete Page View
![Page 3 Complete](images/page_003_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                        a. Reciprocal relationship
                        b. Wants to connect with more Northern NV orgs
                 3. How do collaborating orgs contribute to the overall actions of
                    coalition?
                        a. Open conversation
                        b. Orgs step up for each other
                 4. What does coalition look like outside of policy work?
                        a. Focus on education and empowerment
                               i. Know Your Rights workshops
                              ii. Testimony prep for legislative session
                             iii. Rallies
         iv.   Rosa made a motion to join
                 1. Elizabeth seconded
                 2. Unanimous yes
5. Future Action Items
     ○ Assign next week’s facilitator: Ben
     ○ Eviction rights training by PLAN April 4th (virtual) at 5:30 pm
         i.   Proposed social event
     ○ DSA May Day Potluck 5/1 at 4:30 pm
         i.   Collaboration with Soil Solidarity?
```

---

