---
title: "1892 New Orleans General Strike"
date: 2025
---

# 1892 New Orleans General Strike

1892 New Orleans General Strike Date: Unknown Source: https://libcom.org/article/1892-new-orleans-general-strike Tags: racism, United States, general strikes, docks, New Orleans, 1890s
An extract fromLife in the Teamsters: The Civil Rights Movementdocumenting an early example of class solidarity in the segregationist southern USA.
In the half century after the Civil War, the port of New Orleans wasthe place where white and black workers toiled in the closest proximity.It was on these docks that teamsters—before and after there was aTeamsters Union—faced their first test of their commitment to theprinciples of racial justice and equal economic opportunity. From 1892to the early 1920s, the Teamsters and other workers on the NewOrleans riverfront passed that test.
The fight was a difficult one that defied Southern convention. Thewhite South overwhelmingly opposed the abolition of slavery and spentthe decades after the Civil War trying to re-create a work force that resembledthe slave/master relationship as closely as possible. These effortsincluded denial of civil rights and civil liberties, terrorist campaigns bywhite supremacist organizations, fiercely enforced segregation and convictleasing all strongly opposed by the Teamsters Union. As the yearswore on, state legislatures enacted increasingly strict laws denying blackworkers the economic freedom to work at their chosen occupation. Lawsprimarily in the South denied black workers access to apprenticeship programs,and tried to restrict the type of work they could do. Schools weresegregated and then funding was reduced for black-only schools.Sheriffs enforced these and other “race laws” vigorously. In fact, sheriffsand judges profited from these laws as they leased convicts to corporationsand plantation owners and pocketed the proceeds. Many sheriffsand judges, or their families, leased the convicts themselves and thatmeant that the number of arrests increased significantly at harvest time.Since arrest meant automatic conviction and fine, new convicts easilyremedied any labor shortage.
The white community also enforced the laws and social mores whenregular authority appeared inadequate. In 1892, more than 250 blackswere lynched.1 Despite the increasingly hostile racial environment, itwas in 1892 that black and white workers stood together on the
docksof New Orleans and in the general strike that supported those workers.

## The Triple Alliance

During the summer of 1892, black and white workers organized manynew AFL local unions. The local labor federation, the Workingmen’sAmalgamated Council, included 49 AFL local unions. The Council metin integrated sessions. Among the new unions were the Round FreightTeamsters and Loaders Union, the Scalesmen’s Union and theWarehousemen and Packers’ Protective Union, all of whom worked onthe docks that did not handle cotton. While each union included blackworkers, the overwhelming majority of black workers were teamsters.The three unions created the Triple Alliance to negotiate a contract withthe Board of Trade—the employers’ organization.
The Triple Alliance demanded a preferential union shop, a 10-hourday and overtime pay. The key demand was the preferential union shopthat required employers to hire union members and allowed nonunionworkers to be hired only if the union could not supply a sufficient numberof workers. The Board of Trade flatly rejected the union demandsand on October 24, 1892, members of the Triple Alliance went on strike.The president of the Workingmen’s Amalgamated Councilannounced the same day that if a settlement were not reached quicklythe unions of the Council would strike. The Board of Trade respondedto this pledge of solidarity between the races by saying that an agreementwas possible with white-dominated Packers and Scalesmen.
However, an agreement with the Teamsters was impossible because theBoard refused to “enter into any agreement with niggers.”2 The Board ofTrade also claimed that the Triple Alliance threatened to put employersand control of the docks under “a Big Black Negro.”
The Triple Alliance rejected the racist appeal of the Board of Tradeand confirmed their solidarity. The Alliance withstood media appeals toracial rather than class solidarity. The New Orleans Times-Democrataccused white unionists of being “under the dominance ofSenegambian (African influence) or being “willing tools to carry outSenegambian schemes.” The same paper, in the midst of calm and thelack of racial conflict during the strike, claimed that “brutal” black strikers—“a mob”—were parading about New Orleans “beating up all whoattempted to interfere with them.”3
Not only did the Triple Alliance reject these racist appeals, theWorkingmen’s Amalgamated Council did as well. At union meetingafter union meeting, the rank and file demanded a general strike in supportof the Triple Alliance. The threat of a general strike convinced theBoard of Trade to negotiate. The bargaining collapsed almost immediatelyas the Board refused to discuss the preferential union shop. Inresponse, the workers and unions of New Orleans went on a generalstrike on November 8, 1892.

## Racial Tension Builds

The newspapers responded to the workers’ promise to “tie the town up”with more racist threats. Claiming that the strike would allow blacks totake over the city, the papers claimed that the purity of white Southernwomanhood had been threatened, as “there were instances where ladiesand school children had been insulted by blacks.” Workers continued toreject the appeals to maintain white supremacy. One union officialwrote to AFL president Samuel Gompers that the workers had “cementedthe Bonds of Brotherhood and Fraternal ties that will stand beforethe world as an everlasting monument of strength and that [the AFL]stands
## pre-eminently at the head of the human Race.”4

While the press and its employer allies failed to crack the workers’ solidarity,they were successful in encouraging Governor Murphy Foster to callout 5,000 state militia troops. To the governor’s embarrassment, the strike had been and continued to be so orderly that he was forced to withdraw the troops from the city. The force remained outside the city as a reminder to the workers of the willingness of the state to use force to settle the strike.The failure of the racist appeals and the removal of the troops forcedthe Board of Trade back to the bargaining table.
The threat of the state militia also forced the Workingmen’s Amalgamated Council to call off thegeneral strike. Despite the employers’ promise to never “enter any agreementwith niggers,” the two sides sat down to negotiate. One side, theemployers, was all white, and the other side, the unions, was integrated.After brief negotiations, the Triple Alliance and the Board of Tradereached an agreement. The union won a wage increase, overtime pay,and a ten-hour day. The Board of Trade refused to concede a preferentialunion shop. The failure to win union recognition turned out to bea critical defeat. For the moment, however, solidarity between white andblack workers had won a significant victory. In a period marked byincreasing racism, use of white supremacy in the South and horribleracial violence, workers had rejected those influences. In addition, theTriple Alliance won a rare victory in 1892 as
steelworkers in Homestead,Pennsylvania, miners in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, and switchmen inBuffalo, New York, all suffered defeat.
Racial unity on the New Orleans docks collapsed in the economicdepression that began in
1893. Race riots broke out in 1894 and 1895 aswhite workers tried to oust black workers from
all waterfront work.Employers used the heightened racial tension to pit black and whiteworkers against each other in a bidding war that began to drive wagesdown on the New Orleans docks. After a series of attacks by white unionmembers against black workers, some who were union and some whowere not, Governor Foster called out the state militia ending the riots.Shortly after the troops had withdrawn, white unionists admitted defeatand returned to work at less than union scale. Racial unity had suffered aserious defeat as whites and blacks worked on the docks but only in segregatedwork groups in segregated unions.

## Separate But Equal

In 1896, a year after the waterfront race riots, the United States SupremeCourt ruled that segregation and the fiercest racial discrimination wasconstitutional. In Plessy v. Ferguson, the court ruled that “separate butequal” accommodations were legal.5 Officially, the Supreme Court ruledthat the fate of Southern blacks was now in the hands of white supremacistsand the federal government would not intervene. Two years later, theCourt put the nail in the coffin of justice under the law when it ruled thatMississippi’s denial of the right of black men to vote was constitutional.With the consent of the Supreme Court, state governments and privatecitizens across the South rapidly accelerated the denial of rights.Thousands of black men and women, often convicted of being unableto prove that they were employed, ended up being bought and sentencedto work for a private employer until the employer regarded thedebt repaid. In Alabama, state law prohibited a black worker from leavinghis job without the permission of his employer. Laws across theSouth barred black workers from apprenticeship programs, prohibitedagricultural workers from leaving the industry and made unemployment(vagrancy was the charge) illegal. The guilty party would be fined.If unable to pay the fine, a farmer or corporate employment agentwould pay the fine and the workers would then be under contract in theconvict-leasing program. Finally, by 1901, blacks in the South werestripped of the right to vote leaving them utterly unable to protest thegrowing return of near slave-like conditions.6
The 1890s began decades of rapid decline in the economic, political, andsocial status of Southern blacks. In 1890, there had been more black teamstersthan white teamsters in the
South. According to William Harris, by “1900,there are 6,044 fewer” black teamsters than white. “In 1900,” Harris continues,“83.6 percent of all blacks were employed as agricultural laborers, farmers,planters, overseers, unspecified laborers, servants and waiters, and launderersand laundresses. … And by the end of the decade, white workers weretrying to remove blacks from even those few positions they had attained.”7In New Orleans, the lack of opportunity for black workers to work inskilled jobs was reflected in the rejuvenated labor movement. TheAmerican Federation of Labor and its affiliates had committed themselvesto organizing by craft. This strategy succeeded dramaticallybetween 1897 and 1904 as national AFL membership increased by 1.5million members. New Orleans craft unions were part of this resurgentlabor movement and by 1899 had sufficient local membership to ask theAFL to charter its new Central Trades and Labor Council. In a reflectionof the times, the new Council admitted white-only AFL affiliates.

## Promoting Solidarity

Rather than accept this affront to solidarity, black workers in NewOrleans, led by the black longshoremen and black teamsters on the docks,continued to organize. By 1902, there were an estimated 4,000 blackunionists in New Orleans and by 1904 the United Mine Workers Journalreported more than 11,000 members in nineteen black unions. These11,000 union members were affiliated with a black-only Central LaborUnion that had been formed in 1899 shortly after the all-white CentralLabor and Trades Council was formed. Over the objections of whiteunionists, the AFL chartered the Central Labor Union in June 1901.
The strength of the black unions, especially on the waterfront, forced biracialcooperation. Shortly after the Central Labor Union began functioningas a chartered AFL local labor federation, black and white waterfrontunions established the Dock and Cotton Council. The black teamsters andloaders and the black coal wheelers joined the segregated unions of cottonscrewsman, (workers who crammed bales of cotton into the holds ofships), yardmen and longshoremen. It was a rare organization in the era ofradical segregation. Black and white delegates met together, black and whiteofficers co-chaired meetings and negotiated with employers. Because eachcould do the work of the other, the black and white unions negotiated andenforced work-sharing agreements. This remarkable solidarity was limitedoutside of work. Life in New Orleans was highly segregated.
The Teamsters opted for an inclusive union while the AFL reluctantlychose to accept Southern segregation by accepting black workers in segregatedlocals and chartering
segregated local labor councils. In fact, manyAFL affiliates chose to embrace segregation. The Machinists’ Union explicitlyexcluded black workers. Locals of other unions refused to accept blackmembers of their craft. When the AFL proposed to hire a black organizerin St. Louis, the city’s Trades and Labor Council refused to endorse theappointment and the AFL withdrew.8 As late as 1930, at least twenty-twoAFL unions explicitly excluded black members.

__________________________________________________________

Endnotes1. Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americansfrom the Civil War to World War II (New York: Doubleday, 2008), p. 106.2. Philip S. Foner, History of the Labor Movement in the United States: From the Founding ofthe A. F. of L. to the Emergence of American Imperialism, (New York: InternationalPublishers, 1955, 1980), p. 200.3. Ibid. p. 201.4. Ibid. p. 202.5. Homer Plessy had been jailed for sitting in the “White” car of the East Louisiana Railroad.He argued that Louisiana’s Separate car Act denied his right under the FourteenthAmendment to the United States’ Constitution. The Amendment guaranteed all citizensequal protection under the law. The Supreme Court disagreed and issued its “separate butequal decision” that said segregation was legal as long as the accommodations were equal.6. Blackmon, pp. 120–22.7. William Harris, The Harder We Run: Black Workers Since the Civil War (New York: OxfordUniversity Press), p. 39.8. Philip Taft, The A. F. of L. in the Time of Gompers (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1957),pp. 312–13.
