Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...
         Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922)
         The non-cooperation movement was a political campaign launched on 4 September 1920 by Mahatma
         Gandhi to have Indians revoke their cooperation from the British government, with the aim of persuading
         them to grant self-governance.[1][2][3]
         This came as result of the Indian National Congress (INC) withdrawing its support for British reforms
         following the Rowlatt Act of 18 March 1919 – which suspended the rights of political prisoners in sedition
         trials,[4] and was seen as a "political awakening" by Indians and as a "threat" by the British[5]—which led to
         the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 13 April 1919.[4][6]
         The movement was one of Gandhi's ﬁrst organized acts of large-scale satyagraha.[7] Gandhi's planning of the
         non-cooperation movement included persuading all Indians to withdraw their labour from any activity that
         "sustained the British government and also economy in India,"[8] including British industries and educational
         institutions.[8] Through non-violent means, or ahimsa, protesters would refuse to buy British goods, adopt the
         use of local handicrafts, and picket liquor shops.[9] In addition to promoting "self-reliance" by spinning
         khadi, buying Indian-made goods only, and boycotting British goods, Gandhi's non-cooperation movement
         also called for stopping planned dismemberment of Turkey (Khilafat Movement) and the end to
         untouchability. This resulted in publicly-held meetings and strikes (hartals), which led to the ﬁrst arrests of
         both Jawaharlal Nehru and his father, Motilal Nehru, on 6 December 1921.[10]
         The non-cooperation movement was among the broader movement for Indian independence from British
         rule[11] and ended, as Nehru described in his autobiography, "suddenly" on 4 February 1922 after the Chauri
         Chaura incident.[12] Subsequent independence movements were the Civil Disobedience Movement and the
         Quit India Movement.[11]
         Though intended to be non-violent, the movement was eventually called oﬀ by Gandhi in February 1922
         following the Chauri Chaura incident. After police opened ﬁre on a crowd of protesters, killing and injuring
         several, the protesters followed the police back to their station and burned it down, killing the shooters and
         several other police inside.[3] Nonetheless, the movement marked the transition of Indian nationalism from a
         middle-class basis to the masses.[2]
         Factors leading to the non-cooperation movement
         The non-land movement was a reaction towards the oppressive policies of the British Indian government such
         as the Rowlatt Act of 18 March 1919, as well as the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre of 13 April 1919.
         Although the Rowlatt Act of 1919, which suspended the rights of political prisoners in sedition trials,[4] was
         never invoked and declared void just a few years later,[6] it motivated Gandhi to conceive the idea of
         satyagraha (truth), which he saw as synonymous with independence.
1 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...
         Motivation for Gandhi's movement was further solidiﬁed following the events of 13 April 1919, when a large
         crowd had gathered at Jallianwala Bagh near the Golden Temple in Amritsar to protest against the arrest of
         Saifuddin Kitchlew and Dr. Satyapal,[13] while others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi festival.[14]
         The civilians were ﬁred upon by soldiers under the command of Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer, resulting
         in killing and injuring thousands of protesters. The outcry generated by the massacre led to thousands of
         unrests and more deaths by the hands of the police. The bagh became the most infamous event of British rule
         in India.
         Gandhi, who was a preacher of nonviolence, was horriﬁed. He lost all faith in the goodness of the British
         government and declared that it would be a "sin" to cooperate with the "satanic" government. Likewise, the
         idea of satyagraha was subsequently authorised by Jawaharlal Nehru, for who the massacre also endorsed
         "the conviction that nothing short of independence was acceptable."[4]
         Gandhi derived his ideologies and inspiration from ongoing non-cooperation movements, particularly that by
         Satguru Ram Singh, who is credited as being the ﬁrst Indian to use non-cooperation and boycott of British
         merchandise and services as a political weapon.[15][16]
         In response to the Jallianwala Bagh massacre and other violence in Punjab, the movement sought to secure
         Swaraj, independence for India. Gandhi promised Swaraj within one year if his non-cooperation programme
         was fully implemented. The other reason to start the non-cooperation movement was that Gandhi lost faith in
         constitutional methods and turned from cooperator of British rule to non-cooperator campaigning for Indian
         independence from colonialism.[17]
         Other causes include economic hardships to the common Indian citizen, which the nationalists attributed to
         the economic exploitation of India under colonial rule, the hardships faced Indian artisans due to British
         factory-made goods replacing handmade goods, and conscription being employed by the British Indian Army
         to gather enough recruits during the First World War.[18]
         Movement
         The non-cooperation movement aimed to challenge the colonial economic and power structure, and British
         authorities would be forced to take notice of the demands of the independence movement.
         Gandhi's call was for a nationwide protest against the Rowlatt Act. In promoting "self-reliance," his planning
         of the non-cooperation movement included persuading all Indians to withdraw their labour from any activity
         that "sustained the British government and also economy in India,"[8] including British industries and
         educational institutions.[8]
         Through non-violent means, or ahimsa, protesters would refuse to buy British goods, adopt the use of local
         handicrafts (by spinning khadi, etc.), and picket liquor shops.[9] Moreover:[19]
          ▪ all oﬃces and factories would be closed;
          ▪ Indians would be encouraged to withdraw from Raj-sponsored schools, police
            services, the military, and the civil service, and lawyers were asked to leave the
            Raj's courts;
2 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...
          ▪ public transportation and English-manufactured goods, especially clothing, was
            boycotted; and
          ▪ Indians returned honours and titles given by the government and resigned from
            various posts like teachers, lawyers, civil and military services.
         Gandhi's non-cooperation movement also called for the end to untouchability.
         Publicly-held meetings and strikes (hartals) during the movement ultimately led to the ﬁrst arrests of both
         Jawaharlal Nehru and his father, Motilal Nehru, on 6 December 1921.[10] The calls of early political leaders
         like Bal Gangadhar Tilak (Congress Extremists) were called major public meetings. They resulted in disorder
         or obstruction of government services. The British took them very seriously and imprisoned him in
         Mandalay in Burma and V. O.Chidambaram Pillai received 40 years of imprisonment.
         Veterans such as Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Mohammad Ali Jinnah, and Annie Besant
         opposed the idea outright. The All India Muslim League also criticized the idea. However, the younger
         generation of Indian nationalists was thrilled and backed Gandhi, whose plans were adopted by the Congress
         Party in September 1920 and launched that December.[2]
         Gandhi strengthened the movement by supporting the contemporaneous Khilafat Movement, the Muslim
         campaign to restore the status of the Khalifa and protest the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire after
         World War I. As such, Gandhi received extensive support from Indian-Muslim leaders like Maulana Azad,
         Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi,[20] Abbas Tyabji, Maulana
         Muhammad Ali Jauhar and Maulana Shaukat Ali.[2]
         The eminent Hindi writer, poet, playwright, journalist, and nationalist Rambriksh Benipuri, who spent more
         than eight years in prison campaigning for India's independence, wrote:
             When I recall Non-Cooperation era of 1921, the image of a storm confronts my eyes. From the
             time I became aware, I have witnessed numerous movements, however, I can assert that no other
             movement upturned the foundations of Indian society to the extent that the Non-Cooperation
             movement did. From the most humble huts to the high places, from villages to cities, everywhere
             there was a ferment, a loud echo.[21]
         Impact and suspension
         The impact of the revolt was a total shock to British authorities and a massive support to millions of Indian
         nationalists. Unity in the country was strengthened and many Indian schools and colleges were created.
         Indian goods were encouraged.[11] On 4 February 1922 a massacre took place at Chauri Chaura, a small town
         in the district of Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. A police oﬃcer had attacked some volunteers picketing a liquor
         shop. A whole crowd of peasants that had gathered there went to the police chowki (station). The mob set ﬁre
         to the police chowki with some 22 policemen inside it. Around 30 mobs were there for this incident. This
         cruelty made Gandhi think to end the movement.
         Mahatma Gandhi felt that the revolt was veering oﬀ-course, and was disappointed with the rise of violent
3 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...
         nature of the movement. He did not want the movement to degenerate into a contest of violence, with police
         and angry mobs attacking each other back and forth, victimizing civilians in between. Gandhi appealed to the
         Indian public for all resistance to end, went on a fast and on 12 February 1922 called oﬀ the non-cooperation
         movement.
         End of non-cooperation movement
         The non-cooperation movement was withdrawn after the Chauri Chaura incident. Although he had stopped
         the national revolt single-handedly, on 12 February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi was arrested. On 18 March 1922,
         he was imprisoned for six years for publishing seditious materials. This led to the suppression of the
         movement and was followed by the arrest of other leaders.
         Although most Congress leaders remained ﬁrmly behind Gandhi, the determined leaders broke away,
         including the Ali brothers (Shaukat Ali and Mohammad Ali Jouhar). Motilal Nehru and Chittaranjan Das
         formed the Swaraj Party, rejecting Gandhi's leadership. Many nationalists had felt that the non-cooperation
         movement should not have been stopped due to isolated incidents of violence, and most nationalists while
         retaining conﬁdence in Gandhi, were discouraged.[22]
         Aftermath
         Gandhi's commitment to nonviolence was redeemed when, between 1930 and 1934, tens of millions again
         revolted in the Salt Satyagraha which made India's cause famous worldwide for its unerring adherence to
         non-violence. The Satyagraha ended in success. The demands of Indians were met and the Congress was
         recognized as a representative of the Indian people. The Government of India Act 1935 also gave India its
         ﬁrst taste in democratic self-governance.
         See also
          ▪ Champaran Satyagraha (1917)
          ▪ Rowlatt Satyagraha
          ▪ Civil-disobedience Movement (1930)
          ▪ Quit India Movement (1942)
          ▪ Bhoodan movement
         References
         1. "Culture And Heritage - Freedom Struggle - The Non Cooperation Movement - Know
            India: National Portal of India" (https://web.archive.org/web/20171207074357/htt
            p://knowindia.gov.in/culture-and-heritage/freedom-struggle/the-non-cooperation-mo
            vement.php). knowindia.gov.in. Archived from the original (https://knowindia.gov.in/
            culture-and-heritage/freedom-struggle/the-non-cooperation-movement.php) on 7
            December 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2021.
4 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...

          2. "Noncooperation movement (https://www.britannica.com/event/noncooperation-mo
             vement)." Encyclopædia Britannica, 15 December 2015. Retrieved 2021-08-10.
          3. Wright, Edmund, ed. 2006. "non-cooperation (in British India) (https://www.oxfordre
             ference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803100237329)." A Dictionary of
             World History (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192807007.
          4. Tharoor, Nehru: The Invention of India (2003) p.26-36
          5. Wagner, Kim. Amritsar 1919 (2019) p.59 (https://books.google.com/books?id=bziID
             wAAQBAJ&q=rowlatt)
          6. Wagner, Kim. Amritsar 1919 (2019) p.243 (https://books.google.com/books?id=bziI
             DwAAQBAJ&q=non-cooperation)
          7. Cite error: The named reference renamed_from_67_on_20250620101050 was
             invoked but never deﬁned (see the help page).
          8. Ghosh, Durba (July 2017). "The Reforms of 1919: Montagu–Chelmsford, the Rowlatt
             Act, Jails Commission, and the Royal Amnesty" (https://www.cambridge.org/core/bo
             oks/gentlemanly-terrorists/reforms-of-1919-montaguchelmsford-the-rowlatt-act-jail
             s-commission-and-the-royal-amnesty/D97CA2DF6D0AEBDD9AD2066DB1504C04/co
             re-reader#). Gentlemanly Terrorists. pp. 27–59. doi:10.1017/9781316890806.003
             (https://doi.org/10.1017%2F9781316890806.003). ISBN 9781316890806.
             S2CID 157075881 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:157075881). Retrieved
             4 September 2019. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help)
          9. "Nationalism in India" (https://ncert.nic.in/ncerts/l/jess303.pdf) (PDF). India and the
             Contemporary World - II Textbook in History for Class X. NCERT. 2007. p. 38.
             ISBN 978-81-7450-707-5.
         10. Tharoor, Nehru: The Invention of India (2003) p.41-42
         11. Essay on Non-Cooperation Movement : Data Points (https://learn.culturalindia.net/n
             on-cooperation-movement-history-causes-result-importance.html)
         12. Nehru. An Autobiography (1936). p.81 (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.201
             5.98834/page/n99)
         13. "Distribution of the number of articles on the Punjab disturbances published by the
             Indian Mirror in pamphlet form to members of Parliament and in America" (https://i
             ndianculture.gov.in/archives/distribution-number-articles-punjab-disturbances-publi
             shed-indian-mirror-pamphlet-form). INDIAN CULTURE. Retrieved 25 March 2024.
         14. India and contemporary world II. India: NCERT. 2007.
         15. "Ram Singh | Indian philosopher" (https://www.britannica.com/biography/Ram-Sing
             h). Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 14 June 2020.
         16. Press Information Bureau, Government of India issued on 16 December 2016
         17. Bipan Chandra; Mukherjee, Mridula; Mukherjee, Aditya; Panikkar, Kandiyur
             Narayana; Mahajan, Sucheta (2016). India's struggle for independence: 1857-1947
             (Nachdruck ed.). Gurgaon: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-010781-4.
         18. Bipan Chandra; Mukherjee, Mridula; Mukherjee, Aditya; Panikkar, Kandiyur
             Narayana; Mahajan, Sucheta (2016). India's struggle for independence: 1857-1947
             (Nachdruck ed.). Gurgaon: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-010781-4.
         19. Titles, Medals and Ribbons (https://aeon.co/essays/the-shame-of-sir-british-honoursand-decolonisation)

5 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-cooperation_moveme...

         20. Ministry of Culture, Government of India. "Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi" (https://amritmah
             otsav.nic.in/unsung-heroes-detail.htm?138). amritmahotsav.nic.in.
         21. Biswamoy Pati, Lata Singh, ed. (2014). Colonial and Contemporary Bihar and
             Jharkhand (Chapter 7. Lata Singh, Nationalism in Bihar, 1921-22: Mapping
             Resistances quoting Suresh Sharma (ed.) Benipuri Granthavali, vol. IV, 1998, p.38).
             Primus Books. p. 264 (at p. 127). ISBN 978-93-80607-92-4.
         22. Traboulay, David M. (1997). "Mahatma Gandhi's Satyagraha and NonViolent
             Resistance" (https://academicworks.cuny.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1092&co
             ntext=si_pubs). CUNY Academic works. City University of New York. p. 184.
             Retrieved 13 May 2022.
         Biography
          ▪ Jawaharlal Nehru An Autobiography (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.98
            834). Oxford University Press (1936)
          ▪ Tharoor, Shashi. Nehru: The Invention of India (https://archive.org/details/nehruinve
            ntionof00thar). Arcade Publishing (2003). New York. First edition.
            ISBN 9781559706971
          ▪ Jawaharlal Nehru and Nayantara Sahgal. Before freedom, 1909–1947 : Nehru's
            letters to his sister (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/85772500). Roli Books (2004).
            ISBN 8174363475 OCLC 85772500 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/85772500)
          ▪ Wagner, Kim, Amritsar 1919: An Empire of Fear and the Making of a Massacre (http
            s://books.google.com/books?id=bziIDwAAQBAJ&q=non-cooperation). Yale
            University Press (2019). ISBN 9780300200355
          ▪ Anand, Anita, The Patient Assassin: a true tale of massacre, revenge, and India's
            quest for independence (https://books.google.com/books?id=Mk7ptwEACAAJ&q=sa
            typal), Simon & Schuster (2019), ISBN 978-1-5011-9570-9
         Further reading
          ▪ Andrews, C. F (1920). Non-Co-Operation (https://archive.today/20131130110336/ht
            tp://www.gandhiheritageportal.org/fundamental_workdetail/NS0xMDQ=). Madras:
            Ganesh & Co. Archived from the original (http://www.gandhiheritageportal.org/fund
            amental_workdetail/NS0xMDQ=) on 30 November 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2015.
          ▪ "The Government of India and the First Non-Cooperation Movement--1920-1922" (h
            ttps://www.jstor.org/stable/2051326?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents). D. A. Low
            (1966)
         Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-cooperation_movement_(1919–
         1922)&oldid=1296499109"
6 of 6 8/20/25, 8:49 PM