# 02-07-2024

*Converted from: `./02-07-2024.pdf`*  
*Total pages: 4*  
*File size: 56660 bytes*  
*Converted: Mon Sep  8 02:05:34 PM PDT 2025*

---

## Page 1

### Complete Page View
![Page 1 Complete](images/page_001_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                               02-07-2024
                                 Agenda

1. Introductions
   a. Self Introductions
   b. Go over agenda


2. Assign Roles
   a. Facilitator: Elizabeth
   b. Note Taker(s): Caleb


3. Committee Updates:
   a. Jacob’s Entertainment
         i. Rally Updates
               1. There are posters advertising the rally on Feb.17th, anyone
                   can put up the posters we created for the rally.
               2. Rally will be at the Jade Resort.
               3. This week there was a practice run of touring the Jacob’s
                   demolition sites.
               4. ACTION ITEM: Make up some chants for the rally!
        ii. Poster making event 2/15
               1. Will be at Holland Project (potentially), working on a backup
                   location.
               2. Updates will be posted on the discord.
       iii. Press release updates
               1. Contacted multiple local news outlets (2 newspapers, 2 TV
                   stations)
       iv.  Pass out Flyers
               1. Rosa has digital copies of the Poster and Pamphlets.
               2. There is documentation in the drive containing photos of
                   what was at the demolition sites before they were torn down.
        v.  What is the future of the Jacob’s Entertainment Committee
               1. After the rally, we could focus on pressuring the subsidiary
                   powers that support Jacob’s.
               2. Alternatively, we could focus on canvassing and organizing
                   buildings.
```

---

## Page 2

### Complete Page View
![Page 2 Complete](images/page_002_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                3. Will continue the discussion on other

   b. Power Mapping
        i.  Next Meeting Date/Time
                1. Feb.12th @ 6:30 pm; Virtual Meeting
       ii.  Check-In on what the most valuable targets for power mapping are
            for other projects.

   c. Bylaws Committee
        i.  Next Meeting Date/Time
                1. There is a when2meet in the bylaws channel on discord.
       ii.  Printouts of proposed language re: membership and roles

   d. Social Media Committee
        i.   Give any interview updates
                1. NBC interview flaked
                2. Other news outlets have been interested in interviews and
                   will be covering the Jacob’s Entertainment rally.
                3. ACTION ITEM: Need a volunteer to help manage Instagram.
                4. Northern Nevada Legal Aide/Services Interview on Monday
                   @ Noon.
                       a. Contact Elizabeth if you want to be apart of the
                           interview.
   e. Create a reno-sparks-tenants email
        i.   Was created
       ii.   ACTION ITEM: forward emails to the new email to the old.

   f. We were invited to a Ward 1 Social (Campaign Launch Party)
       i.  Feb.25th



4. New Discussions:
   a. [Caleb] 822 Holcomb Avenue Tenant Issue
         i. A Tenant is having an issue with another Tenant
        ii. Potential Actions:
                1. Canvass
                2. Organize the building
                3. Reaching out to other TU to learn how they handle issues
                   between tenants.
```

---

## Page 3

### Complete Page View
![Page 3 Complete](images/page_003_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                    a. Learn more about the laws surrounding Property
                       Management Companies.
                    b. How to handle disputes between tenants.

b. Marina’s Edge
      i. Updates on most recent canvassing & follow-ups
             1. We have reached out to people who gave contact info, but
                no responses yet.
             2. Discussion about returning to areas to check in. Focus of
                canvassing is to organize the building instead of increasing
                RSTU membership.
                   a. Strategy: Invite people who answer to join in
                       canvassing, or offer tasks that could help people in
                       the community.
     ii. Schedule 3rd canvas, set target date for tenant meeting
             1.
    iii. Other next steps
             1. Make map to more efficiently canvass areas
             2. Call people instead of texting them

c. Time for Ben to talk about collaborating with NHJA (can move this up)

d. Sofía report back from PLAN tenants meeting
      i.  Talked about the aims of organizing to secure tenant friendly
          legislation, and also want to support Tenants Unions.
              1. Can set up Tenant quorums.
     ii.  Provided power mapping exercises.
    iii.  DISCUSSION ITEM: Revisit our comfortability with associating with
          PLAN.
              1. They can be a valuable resource, but also make more
                  concessions than we as a collective of tenants have to.
              2. PLAN potentially will use the TU to gather data.
                     a. Form guidelines on the data we are willing to share.
                     b. VOTING ITEM: Vote on what limitations we want to
                         have in place when working with PLAN.
                     c. ACTION ITEM: Meet with PLAN in order to see what
                         it is they can offer and what they ask in return.
                     d. ACTION ITEM: Invite PLAN members to attend TU
                         meetings.
              3. PLAN resources:
```

---

## Page 4

### Complete Page View
![Page 4 Complete](images/page_004_full.png)

### Extracted Text

```
                        a. Can provide eviction court watches
                   4. PLAN’s plan:
                        a. Organizing people this year
                        b. Push for legislation next year

   e. Alex will report back on Tenant Rights meeting and conversations with
      Legal Aid
         i. We have multilingual documents going over tenant rights.
        ii. They can not represent undocumented people and evictions based
            on drug claims.

   f. Event invite update
        i.   Rally for State Worker Retirement Program Feb.19th from
             Noon-3pm in Carson City.
                 1. Fliers will be added to discord.
       ii.   Make The Road Nevada
                 1. Asked how we can help each other
                 2. Aims to start a tenants union in Las Vegas.
                        a. Can connect them to Las Vegas DSA who also
                            expressed interest in starting a tenants union.
                        b. ACTION ITEM: Host a meeting or presentation on
                            how to start a tenants union (aim: to help tenants in
                            Las Vegas)


5. Future Action Items
   a. Assign next week’s facilitator: Rosa
   b. Audio is still a little echo-y for Virtual attendees
   c. Should we have a social event?
```

---

