Work Week Radio: AFL-CIO and Opposition To Pipeline and Brazilian Workers Strike Date: Wed, 09/28/2016 - 19:21 Source: https://ecology.iww.org/node/1830 Tags: green unionism, yellow unionism, NoDAPL, trade unions, AFL-CIO, North America's Building Trades Unions (NABTU), International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT), Laborers' International Union of North America (LIUNA), National Nurses United, Communication Workers of America (CWA)

## By Steve Zeltser -

## Work Week Radio KPFA

, September 27, 2016 WorkWeek looks at the growing conflict in the labor movement over the Dakota Access Pipeline project and the protests by Standing Rock Sioux Native Americans and other tribes and supporters against the pipeline. LIUNA, the Teamsters, Operating Engineers and Richard Trumpka of the AFL-CIO have supported the pipeline. Additional LIUNA, IBT, Pipefitters and Operating Engineers have also called for calling in the National Guard to protect the pipeline workers from protest. Unions including the National Nurses Union NNU, Amalgamated Transit Union ATU, Communication Workers Of America CWA and American Postal Workers Union have opposed the pipeline and supported the protesting Native American tribes. WorkWeek interviews NNU Director of Director of Environmental Health and Climate Justice for National Nurses United (NNU) Fernando Losada. We also interview Jeremy Brecher who is a labor writer and with Labor For Sustainability. They discuss the split in labor, what is behind it and also the labor management partnership between the building union leadership and the oil and fossil fuel corporations. Next WorkWeek looks at the upcoming strike in Brazil of auto and metal workers along with bank and public workers with Fabio Bosco who is with the Sao Paulo Metro workers union and Conlutas a labor federation which is supporting the strike. Disclaimer: The views expressed here are not the official position of the IWW (or even the IWW’s EUC) and do not necessarily represent the views of anyone but the author’s.